---
layout: post
title: "Fundamentals of Nanoelectronics: Lecture 1.3"
hide: true
---

As discussed in the previous lecture, current only flows in a small energy window around the
electrochemical potential. This happens because the source tries to fill the empty states it sees
to bring it to equilibrium with itself while the drain tries to take it out to bring the channel
to equilibrium with itself. Below the electrochemical potential, this differential is not there,
so no electron transfer happens through those states. 

We will now derive the conductance for two cases, first with the assumption that the density of
states around the electrochemical potential is constant and next without the assumption. The
first one gives us an approximate formula that we saw in the first lecture while the second one
gives us the more general relation. 

We start with this, which is true at steady state:

$Number of electrons in the channel = electrons/second X time spent in the channel$

An analogy for this would be the number of PhDs in a university will be equal to the number of
PhD that enter per year multiplied by the time taken to complete a PhD. For eg, consider that
50 new students enter a year, and on an average it takes 4 years to complete a PhD. This means, at
steady state (once all the years are occupied), there are 200 PhD students in the university.

Going back to our conductance formula, current is charge of electrons/second, therefore, number of
electrons/second = current/charge of electron. The time spent in the channel is t. We defined the
density of states D as the number of states per energy level. The relevant energy level is qV.
Therefore on average, we have D*qV/2 electrons in the channel. We divide by 2 because one contact
is trying to fill the energy level while the other is trying to empty it. So on an average, a
state will be occupied half the time. 

So we have,

$\frac{DqV}{2} = \frac{I}{q} * t$

Hence the conductance $G=\frac{I}{V},

$\frac{I}{V} = \frac{Dq^2}{2t}

Next we consider the general formula, without the assumption of uniform energy in the channel.
Consider a small energy range dE with the energy D(E). The time spent in the channel is also a
function of the energy. So going back to equation 1, the number of electrons in this tiny energy
frame is:

$\frac{D(E)dE}{2} = \frac{I}{q} t(E)$

But the above assumes that the source is completely occupied around the Fermi Level while the
drain is completely empty. This is not true in general. So to include the occupancy of the source
and drain in our analysis, we have to multiply the LHS by $f_1(E) - f_2(E)$. This component takes
into account the fact that current flow is due to the difference in the fermi functions of the two
contacts.

So we have:

$\frac{D(E)dE}{2} (f_1(E) - f_2(E)) = \frac{I}{q} t(E)$

Integrating over the entire energy range to get the total number of electrons in the channel:

$\int_{-\infty}^{\infty}\frac{D(E)}{t(E}(f_1(E) - f_2(E)) dE = \frac{I}{q}$

Here we rearranged the equation so that all the energy dependent components are together.

Therefore, we have:

$I = \frac {q}{2} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty}\frac{D(E)}{t(E}(f_1(E) - f_2(E)) dE

Let us define the conductance as a function of energy G(E) as:

$G(E) = \frac{q^2}{2} \frac{(D(E)}{t(E)}

So we have,

$I = \frac{1}{q} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} G(E) (f_1(E) - f_2(E)) dE$
